---
layout: post
title: Future[T]
comments: true
categories: scala
---
Simply put, `Future[T]` encapsulate a code block that will eventually be run some time in the future. 

<!-- more -->

You can create a new instance of `Future[T]` using the factory pattern, e.g. the `apply` method of the companion object `Future.` 

``` scala
trait Future[+T] extends Awaitable[T]

object Future {
	def apply[T](body: =>T)(implicit ex: ExecutionContext): Future[T]
}
```

The `apply` method of the companion object `Future` takes two parameters in curry form:

`body` is the code block you want to execute in the future. It is supposed to return a value of type `T` if nothing go wrong. If the type is `Unit`, the code will not return a meaningful value and the code is run for side effect.

`ex` is an `ExecutionContext` that manages how the code block will be run, such as by which thread, at what time, etc. You don't need to write your own `ExecutionContext` as Scala has provided a default: `scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global`. You only need to import it into the scope of your code and the apply method will take it implicitly. 

Let's try out an example for `Future[T]`. Copy the following code in Scala REPL and hit enter. 

``` scala 
import scala.concurrent.Future
import scala.concurrent.ExecutionContext.Implicits.global

val future : Future[Unit] = Future {
  println("message from the future")
}
```

You should see the following the in REPL. 

``` scala
scala> val future : Future[Unit] = Future {
     |   println("message from the future")
     | }
future: scala.concurrent.Future[Unit] = scala.concurrent.impl.Promise$DefaultPromise@76cc0e6f
 
scala> message from the future
```

The sequence of the output really highlight what a `Future[T]` really does so it is worthwhile to take deep dive. Right after the you hit enter, the REPL recognizes a `Future[T]` is defined (by displaying  `future: scala.concurrent.Future[Unit] ...`) and then immediately returns to the `scala>` prompt, waiting for your next input. At the same time, the `ExecutionContext` picks up `future` and executes it in another thread. Then it should be no surprise that "message from the future" is displayed after the `scala>` prompt. 

If you are a fighter jet pilot, you can think of `Future[T]` as a *fire-and-forget* missile. You can fire the missile at the locked target. After that, you don't need to wait in the air and continue to provide guidance to the fired missile until it hits the target. Instead, you can focus your attention to the next target or some other maneuver. Obviously this is a substantial tactical advantage. Replace the pilot with thread, and you see the thread creating a `Future[T]` will not need to wait for the future to execute. So `Future[t]` is non-blocking (to the thread creating the future).

